two and a half years ago before AI
became a big deal. There was I I want to
say 2600
gigawatts
in the interconnection queue and we were
expecting 80% of that would never
actually be constructed. Only 20% of it
would. And that's pretty typical
even on a going forward basis.
What are you going to do with those
projects and with those
that land that has already started in a
process of interconnection studies and
the like? Well, you can shift that to
data centers. Especially because a lot
of that you were producing solar
batteries, wind, and and other power
gen. Now you add on the data center
layer to it and what may not have been
economic before now is. Should I build a
data center, Joe?
>> Yeah, and you're a
>> I've got a grid connection. I've got
water.
>> Yeah, there we go. Okay, next project.
Odd Lots builds a data center.
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal. And I'm Tracy Alloway.
[music]
Tracy, you know, we've obviously been
doing a lot about data centers, but one
thing that's sort of becoming
interesting is they're just they just
seem so complicated. There's so many
different moving parts and I don't mean
like technically complicated, although
that's part of it, but they really are
this sort of weird thing where they're a
high-tech thing. They have the most
advanced chips or at least some of them
have the most advanced chips in the
world. Um they're real estate plays and
we talk about securitization and so
forth. And then they have to figure out
all this stuff of how they're going to
connect to the grid and maybe they're
going to build their own power plant
inside the data center, etc. There's a
lot of moving parts. Yeah, there's a
couple things here. So, number one, it
does seem to be a complex space and
whenever I think about how some of these
things are being financed, I get that.
What's the meme with the guy standing in
front of the board with like all the
papers and string connections? It all
feels a little circular sometimes, that
whole ecosystem. But the other thing the
sheer scale of the like financing
requirement for doing this. So, I was
reading a Morgan Stanley report. I think
it came out over the summer. They were
forecasting 2.9 trillion of global data
center spend through 2028. And just for
context, total CapEx spending by all
companies in the S&P 500 in 2024 was 950
billion.
>> crazy. Yeah, and the
numbers are mind-boggling. Well, the
other big question is if you actually
stack that up against existing revenue
from generative AI. Existing revenue is
like 16 billion, right?
So, there's like there's a bit of a gap
there How long
is going to
right? Completely Completely correct.
The other thing that strikes me as very
interesting and tricky is you have these
projects and you know, put out the big
capital capital outlay, capital
commitments, etc. And then the timelines
like oh, when do you get connected to
the grid? When does that turbine for
your inside gas generator get actually
get delivered maybe 2030, etc. So, it
feels like I get the impression you're
dealing with very uncertain timelines.
And so, how you establish that in the
language so everyone feels protected
like what if you could ever get
connected? What if anything could
happen, right?
>> expectations for when this actually
starts to pay off?
>> When does it pay off? What are the
obligations of the tenant, etc. We don't
really know. Anyway, I'm sure it's
different every one.
So many more questions. We're just
scratching the surface. Yeah,
absolutely. And you know, there've been
some interesting things happening. So, a
lot of the good activity has been done
in the private market, but obviously AI
players and companies have a lot of
different options. So, you know, they
could go to securitized markets and I
think we've been seeing some CMBS and
ABS deals there.
Private credit, I mentioned private
equity, bank lending, or they can go the
public route into corporate bonds. And
so, I'm really curious how a lot of
these players are choosing between those
options. Well, I'm really excited to say
we have the perfect guest, someone who
is really at the intersection of sort of
every one of the things that these data
centers are also at the intersection.
We're going to be speaking to Travis
Wofford. He's a partner at the law firm
Baker Botts. He is the chair of the
corporate department based in Houston.
He works on all of these things. He can
tell us what's in the what's in the
details of all these agreements. So,
Travis, thank you so much for coming on
Odd Lots. Great to have you here in
studio. Thanks for having me. Why don't
you give us just a quick overview of
what's your role at Baker Botts? What do
you focus on? What do you call it
practice area? Is that a Yeah, yeah.
Legal term. Yeah, so I'm I'm a deal
lawyer. I help people build, buy,
finance, and sell projects and
companies. And so, we take
multi-disciplinary teams and put them
together in order to actually make
people's dreams a reality is the way I
like to explain it. The idea is somebody
comes to us with a very complex project
and they need
an integrated solution, legal solution
to that problem. So, you want to build a
data center, you've got power. You need
people that actually understand the air,
the water, the interconnection with the
fiber,
the interconnection with power, the
land, everything else, and then the
finance layer on top of that. We provide
a one-stop shop for that. Okay, so my
question is how busy are you right now?
Are you just getting, you know, requests
flying at you constantly? Yes, we're we
are very busy, which is a good thing and
it's a bad thing, right? Because you
your capacity constrained just like your
clients are.
>> Well, my husband is a former lawyer, so
I know how bad it can be. Yes, but the
good thing is they're interesting deals.
It's interesting stuff to work on. It's
in the news on Bloomberg as well.
And
that makes it fun.
Um it seems like at Baker Botts with
like the long history based in Houston
and all the energy stuff. I mean,
this is all sort of novel to everyone,
right? Especially the generative the
generative AI data center. Like that
aspect is just a couple years old. Can
you talk about when there is a new thing
that everyone gets excited about that
maybe even a couple years ago no one was
talking about. Now granted, I know data
centers have a lot longer than a couple
years old, but the explosion of
interest. How do you build that sort of
team that understands all of the
dimensions
so that you can provide that one-stop
shop service? Yeah, so it's it's a
really good question and you know, I
always go back to the expression there's
nothing new under the sun. When you
actually think about what we're doing,
you're building a power project, you're
building out
a data center or the powered shell or
the powered land or the like.
Um
people have been doing that before. When
you're financing these, we're actually
using a lot of the same financing
structures. It may not be exactly the
same, but it rhymes. So, in
10, 20 years ago, we were doing whole
business securitizations of cell towers.
That same securitization technology you
move forward to
residential solar and now you're moving
that same thing forward to CMBS and ABS
of the data centers. So, they're they're
very similar. The rating agencies are
very familiar with these things.
You have to look at a few different
variables and understand them slightly
differently, but particularly energy
infrastructure and and telecom
infrastructure, those are two things
that we've been doing for decades. Oh,
walk us through the differences then.
Between say, you know, a cell tower ABS
or I don't know, a solar power ABS
versus a data center ABS or CMBS. Sure.
So, a cell tower ABS, really when you're
looking at that, you just have the
tower. It's on land. You may have
somebody that's coming along in order to
mow the lawn around it, but they don't
have much in terms of the actual
equipment that's on top of the the cell
tower.
When you have a residential solar
securitization, you put the solar panel
on top of somebody's roof. You're
contracting the cash flows off of that.
Again, on the the cell tower, you're
You pull those together and then you put
a bond on top of it. With a data center
securitization, you have the cash flow
from the data center lease, you have the
cash flow from other aspects of the
business that may be going along with
that like related to the power and some
of the additional services. You pool
those. You have long-term contracted
cash flows and then a rating agency can
rate those as well. But at the end of
the day, you're trying to make sure that
you have a special purpose vehicle that
has all of the assets that it needs
within it. You have an separate entity
that's handling the billing and the
collection.
An entity that's handling the operation
and maintenance
of the asset. And that's supposed to be
a standalone product that can move, you
know, at least the five to seven years
until you get to the anticipated payment
date. And often it's about a 30-year
rated final maturity.
So, I have a question and it's come up a
couple times on previous podcasts, but
you mentioned, you know, having a
special purpose vehicle for this. Sure.
Why does it seem that so many big tech
companies who are in the AI space, who
are presumably very very cash rich and
profitable, why are so many of them
financing off balance sheet?
They have better things to do with their
money.
So, the the return on their invested
capital is much better on the tech side
than it is on the infrastructure side.
Infrastructure is
usually low margins,
but the the benefit with that is it's
long-term reliable
understood assets such as again, if
you're doing a large energy project or
even the powered shell itself, it's
land, it's a building, it's got the
fiber connection, it's got the power
connection, and that's something that
can continue over a long period of time.
Whereas on the tech side
they they make a lot more money and have
much greater margins as we all know.
Right. So, they just want this aspect of
the business, which is could be very
profitable, but it's stable, it's very
predictable. It's like, let's outsource
this. Let's have some other entity house
that risk. What are the risks of in data
center finance? When you think about the
other side, not the tech companies, but
the lenders to it
to the SPV, and we'll talk about the
different structures that that credit
form can take. What are the risks? You
know, it's a fairly stable long-term
thing, but how could things go wrong?
So,
it depends on what exactly you're
financing, right? So, in a
securitization
and
an
ABS, what you're doing is you are
financing the business of this powered
shell or turnkey solution.
The tenant quality is very important. Do
I have somebody that can
that has the investment grade tenant
quality or a diversified pool of high
credit quality tenants who can actually
>> clear, you're securitizing the cash
flows from the data center leases,
right?
>> Yeah, so exactly. So, on an ABS, it's
it's a focus on the business of this
data center. The the actual lease
is in the securitization, and then the
the hard assets are in there, as well.
And a CMBS, you have the lease, as well,
but it's more focused on the mortgage.
Uh-huh. And then we have credit tenant
leases, as well, which are kind of
directly to the tenant.
>> That's useful. Thank you. So,
risks associated with the securitization
are usually focused on the tenant
quality. They're focused on the term of
the lease. How long is the lease? If you
have a
10- or 15-year lease, if you have a
shorter term lease, you're going to look
a little bit more at, well,
is this something that's going to need
to be released in the that time frame?
What is the rate on the lease? If it's a
below-market lease, it's much less
likely that somebody's going to want to
get a new lease and leave you.
And then
the facility itself, is the facility
going to be able to
withstand
kind of technology risk over a long
period of time? So, how are people
structuring the deals at the moment to
compensate for that risk? So, you have
the time mismatch, you have maybe
tenancy rollover risk, as well.
Are are people like adding extra credit
protection, or how are they, you know,
making these palatable to investors?
So,
one is the loan-to-value, your your
advance rate. So,
typically, if you're looking for
something that's an investment grade
securitization, you're going to have it
around 40 to 50%. Um your
the structure of the bond itself will
have a rated final maturity that's much
further out than the lease, maybe 25, 30
years, but you're anticipating that the
full principal of the lease would be
able to be repaid within 5 to 7 years.
Except that
excuse me. The the the full principal
amount of the bond would be able to be
repaid within 5 to 7 years, but the
lease itself is a 10-year lease or a
15-year lease. And then that can get
re-upped for another 10 years on top of
that. So, when you're looking at your
your cash flows, the cash flows are
going to support your ARD prior to even
worrying about
>> The anticipated repayment date of the
bond. Prior to even worrying about your
re-lease. So, one of the things that
sort of like
people tweet about and people even write
about, including us, and we've talked
about it. This whole thing about GPU
life and some of these questions
regarding the long-term value of the
assets and people like, uh, you know,
like to claim, "Oh, they're not as going
to be as valuable long-term as people
think." I can't imagine um
Does this come up in your work? And
like, what is what's really going on
here? Sure. So,
it depends on what the financing
structure is that you're using. So, the
the GPU life itself is more question on
a private credit story or an equity
story. On the securitization side,
they're more focused on the turnkey data
center itself. All right. Um
The useful life
comes up a lot when you're doing the
accounting, and that rolls through to
the earnings per share of these public
companies.
You've got a useful life of I think a
few years ago it was 3 years for these
GPUs. Now, some of them are using 6
years. If you're doing straight-line
amortization,
over 3 years, you're taking about a
third off. Over 6 years, it's obviously
less than that. And so, you have much
less amortization depreciation expense
on it, and that helps your earnings per
share.
What's your impression of how private
credit lenders have been handling the
GPU age aging problem so far? Like, are
they conscious of it, or are people
still kind of basing a lot of their
expected cash flows off of GPUs that
last, you know, longer because they were
previously being used in cloud computing
or something like that? Yeah, so so
they're very aware of it,
particularly because if you look at the
the new, you know,
Nvidia had the H100s and the H200s that
had come out. Then it was the Blackwell,
the B100s, 200s, and now Ruben's going
to come after that, right? So, every 2
to 3 years you have these
new chipsets.
And and that it's almost like do I want
to be financing these laptops that
you've got in front of me for 6 years or
7 years? What's the the replacement
cycle on that? So, when do I need to get
repaid on my debt? The the interesting
part that comes into it is it's not just
one laptop. We're talking about entire
data centers full of these things, and
that's in the tens, hundreds of millions
of dollars. So, how are you actually
going to get your cash flow back when
maybe those aren't going to be used for
training the same way.
The reality though is the useful life of
these and the economic life
is not just that initial usage. You can
use it for other things. So,
um starting out with a training, needing
to get training done as quickly as
possible. If the data center is well
located in Virginia or or another tier
one location, maybe there's inference if
it's close to a a city or other
location. And then for the CPUs,
data centers that have those, you can
use them for compute and analytics and
other technologies and use cases that
maybe that wasn't what you originally
underwrote, but you knew that that was
coming down the line.
Can you talk Since you mentioned
Virginia, can you talk about where we
are in 2025 with data center siting and
picking locations? So, I know that
there's tons around northern Virginia,
and I know that there are some huge
projects in the middle of nowhere in
Texas where they're not going to offend
any neighbors or whatever, et cetera.
But, what are the big themes that
companies are thinking about right now
when they think about location? Yeah, so
one of the great things about Virginia
is
connectivity to the subsea cables. So,
getting to Europe, getting to Africa,
getting to other locations and the rest
of the United States. There's
a great regulatory environment there in
terms of power,
in terms of of actually building out
there the
the infrastructure there and and other
data centers so that you can have
I hate to use the word collocated, but
connectivity within other data centers
makes it makes it very attractive. The
problem is it's saturated. It's a very
saturated market. And so, if you want to
build that next large giant data center,
and you need power
or you need water or you need other
parts of the infrastructure, you're
often and you need to do it quickly,
you're often going to look elsewhere.
That's one of the reasons that Texas and
ERCOT have become so attractive.
Yeah, so one of the things we hear
constantly is that, you know, chips and
financing are not necessarily the big
choke points for doing this. It's more
the power. And I guess I'm curious, is
it really a power shortage problem, or
is it more the distribution of power is
not in the places where these data
centers, you know, want to be because of
convenience like colocation? It's it's
You can say both, as well. Yeah, it
it definitely is both. I will say though
that with power, it's interconnection.
It's getting that actual permission both
for the load, so the data center itself
is drawing power from the grid, and for
the generation. And and those are two
separate interconnections on these
larger facilities that you're going to
be getting at at relatively the same
time. And if you can't have both, then
you're probably not going to be able to
support such a large facility. So,
on the generation side, if you're trying
to get interconnection,
you go through a long process,
potentially with FERC and with your ISO
or RTO,
you know, ERCOT if you're in Texas,
uh to do, typically at this scale, like
the large data center scale, like a
5-year process in order to get that
generation approved and interconnected.
And it's That's just the approval, 5
years, and then you have to actually do
the connection.
>> Yeah, and then you got to build it.
>> Wow.
>> [laughter]
>> The the fun part about that is that that
timeline, a lot of people walk in and
they think, "Oh, I've I've heard that
it's going to be 18 to 36 months in
order for me to get this done." And then
a month or two goes by, and they get a
new date, and it's been pushed out. And
then a few months go by, and they get a
one of the analogies we use is like
you're waiting in the airport to get on
the plane, and you know, they they call
I I I fly United all the time. They're
like, "Oh, it's global services." Okay,
global services, go forward. And now,
uh, armed services. Okay, armed
services. And, uh, people with young
children. And and you just you realize
that that first-class ticket that has,
you know, boarding group one doesn't
mean that you're getting on first. Well,
you all get there at the same time, at
least. This is how I cuz, you know, I
don't like waiting there, either. But, I
was like, you know what? I'm getting I'm
going to arrive at the destination the
same as all these people with children
and everything. So, it's hot. Anyway,
um, you know, there was a story recently
where we've one of the big neo cloud
companies uh, sort of lowered a growth
forecast because of a delay in a
third-party data center project, which
is exactly sort of what you're talking
about these things. How does that affect
the financing, this uncertainty of when
you can actually plug these things in or
when they're going to get approved? Um,
because that sounds very frustrating,
and time is money. And so, how does that
interact with the credit component?
Yeah, so so you kind of have three
categories in the timeline of one of
these projects. You have your
development capital, that's often equity
funded. Uh, you have your construction
capital, so you get a big construction
loan once you've got your permits and
your power. And then, after that's been
completed, then you do your takeout
financing. That maybe the securitization
and the like.
Um,
has the environment has the uh,
regulatory and may I guess political
environment does it feel like it's
significantly changed in the last 6
months? So, you talk about like, you
know, very few people were talking about
water. My impression is that the water
component specifically is very overrated
based on things I've read. But, it
obviously is a matter, but, you know,
the public is really concerned about
water. The public is clearly concerned
about electricity prices. People are
showing up to town halls to protest or
to voice their opposition to new data
center projects in the neighbor in the
areas where they live. Does it feel like
the environment today when we're talking
in December 2025 is meaningfully
different than it was at the start of
the year in terms of public awareness of
all this stuff? So, so politically,
absolutely, right? Um, I I think that
the community organizers and there are a
lot of organizations that kind of make
their money based on outrage around
these types of things. Um, they've
realized that this is a great
opportunity for them. And if if you look
at the sustainability reports of a lot
of the hyperscalers uh, and others, they
talk about being water-positive. It
doesn't mean that they're just happy
about water. It means that they're
actually trying to have a positive
impact, and they'll start uh, putting
money into the watersheds and the like.
Um, and and water replacement. And that
actually is really meaningful, and it's
a part of the story that I think a lot
of the folks that are thinking about the
political aspect of this don't realize,
which is when these data centers come in
and the balance sheets of these
hyperscalers come into an area that's
largely been overlooked. You know, it
it's that New Yorker
uh, magazine cover where, you know,
you're looking from uh,
you know,
the East River through Manhattan, and
then it's California, right?
>> Exactly. A lot of these areas are are
are underinvested, particularly in
infrastructure. And a hyperscaler comes
in and starts saying, "Well, you know,
this water treatment facility isn't
sufficient. We need to build it out."
That's very meaningful. Part of that
interconnection study that we're doing,
you're looking at the electric
transmission of the area. That is very
meaningful.
But, water for the developer,
it's not a problem unless it's actually
a problem. What I mean by that is, you
know,
we we have a lawyer on
several lawyers on staff that focus on
water. And one of them, for example,
knows all 98 water districts in Texas,
and knows which one you're supposed to
go to if you want to get your project
done quickly, and which one to avoid.
That's something that if you mess it up,
could really affect your timeline. Wait,
now I'm really curious. What would make
one water destination more attractive
versus the one you want to avoid? Is it
just regulatory hurdles, or is it like
quality of the water? So, it it's not
quality of the water. You know, if if
it's potable water, it's potable water.
Um, it's both water supply and then
water offtake. So, um, one of the issues
in oil and gas in Texas that they've had
is, where do we where do we get all the
water, and what what do we do with all
of this wastewater? It's the exact same
thing with data centers. Uh, obviously,
they're putting different chemicals into
the water in order to put it into the
facility, but it's still a chemically
treated water that has to be processed
before it can go back either into the
drinking supply or into, you know, the
rivers and streams. And so, just back to
the uh, the political environment, like,
what's that doing on the ground today?
This big change that's occurred because
everyone's up in arms about all this
stuff. How is that affecting some of the
project planning that exists today?
So, I I I think that the developers have
been very mindful in the past, but
they're even more so now because of the
sensitivity around it. They're In
certain states, they will be more um,
they're considering proposals that might
involve moratoriums on data centers.
Yeah. Um, that's not the case in Texas.
If you look at uh, what Governor Abbott
and and the legislature have been doing,
they're pushing a more data centers,
more tax incentives,
uh, more infrastructure. Uh, I I think
Virginia and several other places
realize how important it is to their
economies as well, and to their tax
base,
um, because data centers produce a lot
of tax revenue for these states, which
go to help fund schools and the like. Is
anyone talking about public-private
partnerships in the data center context?
I feel like this is something that like
comes in waves. People start getting
really really excited about like
public-private partnerships for
infrastructure buildout, and then you
don't hear about it for like 5 years,
and then it comes back. Are we in one of
those waves right now when it comes to
data center spend, or not really? Yeah,
so so
I'm thinking about what I can say. So,
the the short answer is yes, those are
being explored. Um,
they're both from the perspective of
public-private partnerships, but also
from the perspective of like the
Department of Energy Loan Program Office
All right, you worked on that, right?
>> the others. Yes, they they can provide
uh, financing support. Um, and and the
Department of Energy has been
you know, very vocal about what the Loan
Program Office offers. The Department of
Defense, Department of War, I guess,
now, uh, also has programs that they can
make available. Some of these are actual
grants, some of them are loans. But,
separate and apart from that, there's
loan guarantees. And so, you have a
backstop by the federal government of a
loan that, let's be honest, if you're at
40% loan-to-value, and you've got
um, investment-grade tenant that's going
to be paying the lease longer than the
term of the
um,
of of the bond, do you really need it?
Probably not, but it can help lower the
cost of capital, anyway.
>> Actually, say more about that, because
we did several episodes and we've done
several episodes about the idea of loan
guarantees, and particularly the Loan
Programs Office. Well, but from the
private side, like, talk to us about how
that functionally turns into, okay,
we're going to get a better credit
rating, or this is going to enable
private This is going to crowd in
private capital, as they like to say.
What happens?
How What is the steps via which the
government's role suddenly unlocks this
financing? So, I I I think in
all credit, um, when you when you're
trying to underwrite any kind of loan,
you want to see what are the cash flows
or what's the collateral, and am I going
to get paid back? What's the likelihood,
right? And one of the things that
the frameworks I think of are, show me
who you walk with, and I'll show you who
you are, right? Okay, fine. If you have
the United States government that is
providing a backstop, then I can be
confident I'm going to get paid back. If
it's Microsoft or Google or another
who's providing a guarantee on a project
or the loan, then I'm very comfortable
that I'm going to get paid back. Um,
when you put these types of things
together, that means I don't have to
charge you
an extra incremental amount to protect
me from that credit risk. And that extra
money that you keep in your pocket, you
can then turn into additional projects,
and it's a velocity of money Mhm.
concept.
I want to go back to private credit for
a second, because, you know, as you
mentioned earlier, a lot of these deals
have been done through in the private
credit space so far. And companies have
a lot of options when it comes to
financing. As I mentioned in the intro,
they can go the public route, um, they
can securitize, they can go to private
credit. And whenever people talk about
private credit in the context of AI,
they always say vague things like, "Oh,
it provides customizable financing
options and stuff like that." What
exactly is the attraction of private
credit for data centers and AI buildout?
So, one of the most attractive things
that private credit can, but doesn't
always offer, is non-dilutive capital,
right? Equity is dilutive, um, and
equity is very expensive. There's that
risk premium that's associated with it.
Private credit, there is an assumption
in the story that,
um, because of the extra protections
that they receive, they don't need the
same uh, equity risk premium. So, a lot
of them are looking at maybe a 15% IRR.
They might charge you 10 to 12% up
front, but then, because of the MOIC,
the
basically their minimum return on the
capital that they'll get paid, or an IRR
premium over time in the takeout, then
they'll have a catch-up on the back end.
The the equity, they're taking a
percentage of what you, at the end of
the day, are going to get, and it's
usually a much more expensive piece.
Private credit But what about private
credit versus other forms of credit like
bank lending or the public bond market
or something?
>> Well, can you get it? Well, I mean
that's the I mean what is that's the I
don't know. The underwriting standards
for private credit can be
riskier than what you would have from,
you know, a bulge bracket bank's
credit desk.
This is another thing I'm wondering. So
when it comes to tenant diversification
in data centers, how is that judged and
evaluated and priced? Because if I think
about who's in a you know, using a data
center
correlation is hard to measure at at the
best of times. And if I think about, you
know, like a new business that's growing
and everyone is suddenly using it, it
feels like the kind of thing that could
end up being very correlated as opposed
to diversified.
So when you are thinking about larger
investment-grade
bonds and debt in data centers, normally
you are thinking about wholesale data
centers where there's one tenant that's
that has that facility and that tenant
has investment-grade
credit quality.
>> Right. Um it it's much less likely that
you are going to have a pool of
non-investment-grade
tenants in a kind of colocation style
data center. And then
because of that Fitch or S&P or Kroll is
going to give you this investment-grade
rating. So I
I I don't think that the expectation
should be
that you're going to get a
investment-grade rating on a pool of
non-investment-grade tenants. At least
not right now. I think that eventually
when you've got thousands of tenants
across, you know, hundreds of data
centers, that becomes much more
attractive. It's just not really where
the market is right now. We did an
episode a few months ago in September
actually where we talking to
this guy Don Wilson in Chicago who's
setting up a trade of futures trading
firm for GPUs and theoretically you
could hedge your GPU cost. As you think
about the industry going forward and you
could you see that being a useful
instrument for data center financing or
I'm a little concerned about are the is
the value of this collateral going to
same? I want to hedge the GPU exposure.
Could you see over time it maturing and
that being a valuable thing? I
I love new finance tools. I think that
that kind of creative creativity is
really important. There's always an
opportunity there. The
the thing I have noticed with the data
centers just with other asset classes is
that there's always a cash flow stream
that is not being utilized. And so for
example, if you have a securitization
you're or really any bond, you're not
necessarily going to get credit for
everything in it. So your contracted
cash flows, if that counterparty is an
investment-grade
may not get
an advance rate, a loan to value on
that. Somebody else should be there in
order to take advantage of that and
provide you with additional capital that
you can then reinvest into development.
>> So last week we had a big outage at the
CME and futures were basically frozen
for like 10 hours or something. And this
was because of an issue at one of the
CME's data centers
which is operated by a company called
CyrusOne.
Is there a reputational or operational
risk that either deal structures or
investors need to be aware of when it
comes to these financing arrangements?
Reputational or in in what regards?
Sorry.
>> Well, for instance if CyrusOne has a big
meltdown at one of their data centers
which seems to have happened because one
of their cooling centers reportedly
malfunctioned. Is that something that
then gets priced into the financing
arrangement or is that something that
investors should be concerned about? So
these are
these are definitely things that
investors underwrite too. So
if you are a
blue-chip operator and developer, you
are going to have a lower cost of
capital than you would otherwise. There
are a lot of Johnny-come-latelies into
data centers over the last 2 years since
AI has
really come to the forefront. The people
that have been doing it for a decade,
they know what they're doing and they're
very good at it and that doesn't mean
that there aren't going to be problems.
Yeah. Um you know,
things blow up sometimes.
>> Squirrels chew wires.
>> Yeah, it it Hopefully not subsea ones
though.
There there there are accidents all the
time, but that's part of why you have
these pretty incredible engineering
studies that are done in order to
actually put these things together.
Um and and freak accidents happen and
you know,
that's part of the credit risk. Compared
to other sort of real estate plays,
um is there more sort of I guess
operational risk in a data center than
in other you know, where just some sort
of retail packaging retail distribution
facility? I imagine the sort of
operational risk isn't going to be as
great in something like that.
>> Yeah, that So that's part of why they
have these service level agreements
within the data centers themselves
where the operator is agreeing to
provide an uninterruptible
non-intermittent power.
That that's one of the big things that
people focus on and how do the terms of
that contract work and what are the
backstops? You you could have a reserve
account associated with it so that if
there are payments that are necessary to
be made
that there's just cash sitting there
ready to go.
Normally people are are thinking that
that would reduce the the cash flow on
the bond
and and that would reduce at the end of
the day the equity distribution coming
from the SPV as opposed to affecting the
um
you know, the payment on the bond.
That reminds me actually. Are you seeing
a big
surge in demand for like data center
insurance or for people, you know, who
want to insure not just against
operational risk but cyber risk and
things like that? Yes. So the one of the
wonderful things about any kind of
economic activity is that the insurance
market is always there to support it.
Well, like the lawyers as well, right?
>> Yeah, definitely. Give us a call, right?
The the reality though is um
the you know, there are products that
data centers have had for decades and
then there are new risks that are coming
up just because of how AI training
works.
You can always go to Lloyd's of London
in order to get a specific policy if
necessary. But for the most part um
these are risks that have already been
priced in and there are products that
are already there. Now
um know,
there's talk of well, there are products
that exist in terms of
getting an insurance product to handle
your technology risk. So does the does
the product work at the end of the day
or does it become obsolete too quickly?
That looks more like a bet almost as
opposed to a real insurance policy, but
it's something that can be underwritten.
How valuable is just having a
a plug-in to the grid? You know, I'm
thinking about all those various deals
of companies wanting to buy Bitcoin
mining operations for example and it
seems like you know what? Yeah, maybe
you could make a little money mining
Bitcoin, but you have you have access to
24/7 reliable power. That's a lot more
valuable than what's going on inside the
shell here. Talk to us just about that
value of anyone who has access to power.
So so powered land is huge and that is
developing, you know, it it it's existed
for a while, but is becoming more and
more important
because there are REITs and real estate
developers who don't need to have the
sophistication of can I do the new
direct to cooling
technology for a powered shell or
turnkey solution. I I'm just going to
have land and I'm going to make sure
that there's sufficient power here
for you to build your data center or for
you to bring your GPUs into. That's
attractive. If you listen to the
earnings calls of several of the real
estate developers,
they're moving into that if they haven't
already. So there So their job is
they're just going to secure land that
they can know that they know they can
get power to.
>> So they've already got land, right? So
So the the interesting part is there's
so many different projects
over the last several decades where
they've been working through
interconnection studies for the land for
you name it project and they're waiting
years and years just like everybody else
in order to get those done. Well,
why use it for this when we can use it
for that and data centers you can make a
lot more money on it.
Isn't the obvious solution to the power
problem just for, you know, the the big
guys to build their own power system and
maybe spend a little bit more money
plugging it into the grid again if
political pushback is becoming an issue
or if regulators are worried about this?
Shouldn't they just do it on their own?
Is that the straightforward thing to do?
The hyperscalers themselves? I I think
that goes back to what are what's the
best use of their capital? They're
they're not in the infrastructure
business specifically. Though though I
will say
if if you look at I love
Amazon as a good example. They sold
books. They had the website. They they
needed to expand so they built Amazon
Web Services. They needed distribution.
They've got that.
Tech companies have been becoming energy
companies for years. Energy companies we
know had to become tech companies a
decade ago in order to just keep up. But
now there's this integration that's
happening from both sides.
Both in terms of what's happening in
their operations, but the ownership
itself. Just going back to
powered land
for a second. So what you're saying is
that there are these developments that
have been going on a long time, but they
were initially planned for something
else. But then today in 2025 as they're
getting closer to when they could be
connected, maybe AI is a you know what
we this could this this connection is a
lot more valuable
for an AI data center. Absolutely. This
is interesting cuz this to me like the
only reason I go back to this is because
one of the things that when people talk
about an AI bubble, if there is one, is
this idea of crowding out other
productive uses of the economy, right?
Are there better things in the long term
that we could have done with these
turbines? Are these other better things
electrical connection systems, etc. and
other companies might have been waiting
on some piece of gear and the AI data
center outbid them. And I'm not going to
I'm not asking you like if this is
sustainable, but there are other things
that are going to lose out or not have
access to electricity that people wanted
to do but aren't going to because that
wire is more valuable for an AI company.
100%. Think about
um
the actual interconnection queue
two two and a half years ago before AI
became a big deal. There was I want to
say 2600
gigawatts
in the interconnection queue and we were
expecting 80% of that would never
actually be constructed. Only 20% of it
would. And that's pretty typical
even on a going forward basis.
What are you going to do with those
projects and with those that land that
has already started in a process of
interconnection studies and the like?
Well, you can shift that to
data centers. Especially because a lot
of that you were producing solar
batteries, wind and and other power gen.
Now you add on the data center layer to
it and what may not have been economic
before now is. Should I build a data
center, Joe?
>> Yeah, and you're going
>> I've got a grid connection. I've got
water. Yeah, there we go. Okay, next
project. All-Bloats builds a data center
in protected land in Connecticut. Um
probably [clears throat] not.
Um actually
so this sort of piggybacks on a question
that Tracy asked already, but
why not just for you know as these as
companies, particularly the hyperscalers
that look out in the environment and
there's all these people showing up at
meetings complaining about the water,
etc. like that. Why isn't the future
just entirely behind the meter in Texas
where it's like we're just going to
build it all, we're going to have the
natural gas plant on site, we're never
going to bother with the grid, we're
never going to we're just going to have
the plant right there. Why isn't it the
just the entire future of data centers?
>> So so there one of the issues with
behind the meter is what if the data
center goes away? So for example, what
if Mark Zuckerberg one day decides I'm
not doing the metaverse anymore and
somebody in AI says I'm not doing AI
anymore. Or we move from GPUs to quantum
computing or something like that.
You want to have that generative
capacity interconnected with the grid so
that you don't have a stranded asset.
Looking forward and I mentioned earlier
Coreweave saying, "Okay, there was a
delay in some of its buildout." What are
the big choke points and do you expect
them to stack up? We recently did an
episode
with Travis Kavulat NRG and he was like,
"I don't know. Like the amount of just
the sheer amount that we're adding to
the grid like it's going to be tough and
I don't know how it's all going to pan
out for some of these projects." But
what do you see as the sort of big
bottlenecks or choke points that you're
thinking about in the coming years?
So power continues to be the number one
bottleneck. I don't think anybody would
dispute that. Water obviously is an
issue as well. Getting the turbines and
getting what you actually need in order
to produce
power is very difficult.
I
I do think though that
when you look at how some of these
interconnection requests are
prepared, you have five or 10 different
people making applications for the exact
same project. So it inflates what the
expectations are on the number of
projects in the market at a given time.
Um
when when you get rid of all of that
extra wash, you you wind up with
hyperscalers,
large enterprises and other real
investment grade or serious tenants give
you projects that can get done. That's
infrastructure. That's infrastructure
grade. And a lot of the speculative
assets
um
that those are power points. They they
probably are not going to get made,
particularly if there's any kind of
economic shock later.
Travis Wolford, thank you so much for
coming on Odd Lots. That was great.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
>> Tracy, I thought that was really
helpful.
Really clarified a lot of things for me.
I'm trying to think like the point about
the sequencing of the financing. I
thought it was really interesting or
very important to help me understand
these things because in my mind I'm like
well, they're going to like lose so much
money, they're breaking ground on all
these deals. What if they don't actually
get implemented because you're waiting
forever? And so hearing him describe the
sequencing of different financing at
different stages like, all right, well,
at least
that makes sense to me.
Yes, I still feel like there's kind of a
mismatch issue here. Well, it just feels
like you know, you're talking about a
technology that has like [clears throat]
its own upgrade risk, let's say. Like
you know, people are developing new
chips pretty fast and you don't know
when the next one is coming down the
line and when you might want to replace
all your chips with something else. So
that's one thing. Um tenancy rollover
risk. I know he pushed back a little bit
on the diversified point, but you know,
again my understanding is for a lot of
the ABS structures, maybe CMBS as well,
diversification is part of the proposal
and I think he mentioned it earlier.
And that seems difficult to me to
accurately measure. If you have a bunch
of tenants all, you know, doing
something in the cloud, drawing
something from a data center, if there's
a big macroeconomic downturn or
something like who's to say that they're
not all going to renege on their lease
at once?
>> The levels of uncertainty just seem so
extreme because you're talking about
okay, there's the economic downturn.
There's the fact that maybe a lot of
this AI stuff could completely fizzle
out and doesn't produce a
return even in normal times. Then
there's the technological questions.
Then there's the operational questions
about are you actually good at operating
and building a data center? Not everyone
is going to be the same. And then
there's the grid interconnection and all
of these things about like reliability
of power, etc. So it feels like yes, on
the one hand I'd very much buy that on
paper
yes, you know, this is the 2025
iteration of what used to be cell towers
or what used to be rooftop solar or
anything else, but with just an I mean
he mentioned with the cell tower for
example, you have one guy whose job is
to mow the lawn, right?
>> [laughter]
>> And that's like that's the It's just
going round and round the cell tower.
>> like operational component. I get the
you know, most of most of the time the
tower is just there, right? And you have
to make sure that it's in a safe area,
etc. But the the degree of complexity of
operational complexity, of technological
energy complexity for these just seems
like exponentially higher.
>> Yeah, and I keep thinking back to just
the sheer scale of it and like the
numbers that get thrown around.
Literally trillions of dollars in the
next few years.
Um well,
I'm sure we'll do more episodes on it.
There's so many there's so many
so many sub episodes we could do
including how the best of the Texas's 98
water districts and how you find which
one is the best.
>> Joe, you know what sub episode we could
do? What? Subsea cables. We got to do we
didn't get into that, but we should do.
That was the plan.
>> was the plan.
Yeah. Well, we should do more subsea
cable episodes. And actually just in
in terms of data center siting like
access to you know, latency risk and
where it needs to be, etc. is something
we should talk about more. Should we
leave it there for now? Let's leave it
there. All right, this has been another
episode of the Odd Lots podcast. I'm
Tracy Alloway. You can follow me at
TracyAlloway. And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
You can follow me at the Stalwart.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
and Keil Brooks at KeilBrooks. For more
Odd Lots content, you should definitely
check out our newsletter. You can find
that at bloomberg.com/odd lots. And you
can join fellow listeners in
conversation 24/7 in our Discord
discord.gg/odd
lots. And if you enjoyed the
conversation, please like or leave a
comment or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.
>> [music]